<div class="section">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

<div>

### <span id="development_guide_for_gcbasic_exe_compiler"></span>Development Guide for GCBASIC.EXE compiler

</div>

</div>

</div>

There are lots of ways to contribute to the GCBASIC project: coding,
testing, improving the build process and tools, or contributing to the
documentation. This guide provides information that will not only help
you get started as a GCBASIC contributor, but that you will inform you
as an experienced contributor wanting to help.

  

<span class="strong">**Need Help?**</span>

The GCBASIC community prides itself on being an open, accessible, and
friendly community for new participants.   If you have difficulties
getting involved or finding answers to your questions, please bring
those questions to the forum via the discussion boards, where we can
help you get started.

We know EVEN before you start contributing that getting can be a
challenge.   This guide is intended to help.   We are always looking for
ways to improve the software: making GCBASIC more open, accessible, and
easier to participate with.   If you are having any trouble following
this guide, or hit a barrier you cannot get around, please contact us
via the discussion forum.   We will solve hurdles for new contributors
and make GCBASIC better.  

This addresses the changes and updates to the GCBASIC compiler.  

  
  

<span class="strong">**BACKGROUND**</span>

The compiler was created by Dr. Hugh Considine when he was 12 years
old.  That was in 2005.  Hugh came up with the idea for a new compiler -
of the then available compilers - they were hard to use and not free.
  And, he had some spare time.

Hugh believes that GCBASIC should be free to all - forever.  

The original software was called Great Cow BASIC, but, he had some
resistance in getting high schools in Australia to use and agree to the
use of text based programming.   Graphical GCBASIC was created to
address the need for a graphical user interface.  Graphical GCBASIC acts
like a set of training wheels.    The concept of Graphical GCBASIC is
that the icons make it less scary, and since they all share names with
the BASIC commands it is then easy to remember what command corresponds
to each icon..   Using Graphical GCBASIC users can then switch to text
mode whenever they want to, go backwards and forwards a few times if
they want, and finally end up using just the text programming.   It is a
journey from a graphical user interface to text based programming.    
  
Those who already have programming experience can go straight to
GCBASIC, while those who would prefer a lighter learning curve can take
the Graphical GCBASIC option.    The two approaches targets two
different sets of users who ultimately want to do the same thing.  
  
As for the <span class="strong">**name**</span>, it was about the fourth
name Hugh tried.   First name was BASPIC, but it did not seem memorable
enough.   Then, he considered some animal names - first thought was
Chipmunk BASIC, but someone already used that!   Then, Bear BASIC, but
decided against it on finding out the slang meaning of bear.   Final
name was GCBASIC, which is named after something his sister and he came
up with (when aged 12 and 15!!).   No-one else had that name, it had no
meanings that could offend, and it was something odd enough to be
memorable, so Great CoW CBASIC it was.

In 2013 Evan Venn joined the team as a compiler developer, with others
joining in Bernd Dau, Trevor Roydhouse, Pete Everett, Theo Loermans,
Giuseppe D’Elia, Derek Gore, Ian Smith, Bernd Dau, Theo Loermans, Urs
Hopp, Kent Schafer, and Frank Steinberg.   Some those that joined in
drove changes to the compiler, some changed the source code, some built
tools and some built libraries.   They all had one thing in common -
improvements to the GCBASIC compiler.

In 2021 we are still having new developers join the project like ToniG
adding a new capability for handling Tables.

In 2023 we renamed to GCBASIC.  The Cow is now deadbeef …​ a hex number
.. :-).

  
  

<span class="strong">**THE COMPILER**</span>

The compiler executable is called GCBASIC.EXE.    The compiler source is
written in FreeBASIC.   FreeBASIC is a multiplatform, free/open source
(GPL) BASIC programming language and a compiler for Microsoft Windows,
protected-mode MS-DOS (DOS extender), Linux and FreeBSD.     
  
The official website is <https://www.freebasic.net/>  
  
FreeBASIC provides syntax compatibility with programs originally written
in Microsoft QuickBASIC (QB).   FreeBASIC is a command line only
compiler, unless users manually install an external integrated
development environment (IDE) of their choice.   IDEs specifically made
for FreeBASIC include FBide and FbEdit, while more graphical options
include WinFBE Suite and VisualFBEditor.    
  
The source code is Open Source.   And, has a GNU GENERAL PUBLIC
LICENSE.    
  
The source code for the compiler can be found on
<a href="https://sourceforge.net/p/gcbasic/code/HEAD/tree/GCBASIC/trunk/" class="link">SourceForge</a>  
  
Use SVN to UPDATE and COMMIT code changes.   You require developer
access to SourceForge but if you have got this far then you already know
this.   You are therefore required to use SVN for source code
management.

When COMMITting you MUST update the change log, then, when you commit an
update use the change log with the SourceForge commit number.   Then,
add the new change at the end of the change log.   The COMMIT message
should be the same as the description in the change log.   Add the
\[<span class="emphasis">*COMMIT NUMBER\]*</span> to the description in
the change log to show the COMMIT number.  

You will find the changelog
<a href="https://onedrive.live.com/Edit.aspx?resid=2F87FFE77F3DBEC7!67634&amp;wd=cpe&amp;authkey=!ADmkT3exl5l4Pkc" class="link">here</a>.  
The change log is an EXCEL spreadsheet.  

  
  

<span class="strong">**COMPILER ARCHITECTURE**</span>

The compiler is relatively simple in terms of the architecture.   There
is a main source program with a set of header files that contain other
methods or declarations.   The GCBASIC header files are the following:

``` screen
    1. preprocessor.bi -  methods, statements, defines, declarations, prototypes, constants, enumerations, or similar types of statements
    2. utils.bi - methods that are shared across the architecture
    3. variables.bi - methods that control the creation and management of variables
    4. assembly.bi - methods specific to the generation of GCAssembler (GCASM)
    5. file.bi - the FreeBASIC files library
    6. string.bi - the FreeBASIC string library
```

The supporting files are:

``` screen
    1. messages.dat - the English messages source file.  All user messages from the compiler are sourced from this file.
    2. reservedwords.dat - the list of system reserved words
```

  
  
The compiler process is simple.   The process, shown below, generates
the ASM source and the HEX file from the user source program.

``` screen
    1. Create the indexes
    2. Declare the methods, arrays and variables
    3. Process the user source programs using PreProcessor method. This includes
        i.     Loading of all source files including including files
        ii.    Translate files, if needed
        iii.   Examine source for comments, tables, asm, rawasm, functions;subs;macros, set origin of valid code
                    Origin = ";?F" + Str(RF) + "L" + Str(LC) + "S" + Str(SBC) + "?"
                    RF = File number
                    L  = Line number in source file
                    S  = Sub Routine number
        iv.    Find compiler directives, except SCRIPT, ENDSCRIPT, IFDEF and ENDIF - including all the #DEFINEs outside of condiontal statements
        v.     If GLCD_TYPE in user source program is found, then, determine the library and load that library with all dependent libraries. This method improves compiler performance by only loading the required libraries
        vi.    ReadChipData
        vii.   CheckClockSpeed
        viii.  ReadOptions
        ix.    PreparePageData
        x.     PrepareBuiltIn.  Initialise built-in data, and prepare built-in subs.
        xi.    RunScripts
        xii.   BuildMemoryMap
        xiii.  Process samevar and samebit
        xiv.   RemIfDefs.  Remove any #IFDEFs that do not apply to the program.
        xv.    Prepare programmer, need to know chip model and need to do this before checking config
        xvi.   Replace Constants
        xvii.  Replace table value.  Replace constants and calculations in tables with actual values
    4. Compile the program using the CompileProgram method
         i.    Compile calls to other subroutines, insert macros
         ii.   Compile DIMs again, in case any come through from macros
         iii.  Compile FOR commands
         iv.   Process arrays
         v.    Add system variable(s) and bit(s)
         vi.   Compile Tables
         vii.  Compile Pot
         viii. Compile Do
         ix.   Compile Dir
         x.    Compile Wait
         xi.   Compile On Interrupt
         xii.  Compile Set(s)
         xiii. Compile Rotate
         xiv.  Compile Repeat
         xv.   Compile Select
         xvi.  Compile Return
         xvii. Compile If(s)
         xviii Compile Exit Sub
         xix.  Compile Goto(s)
    5. Allocate RAM using the AllocateRAM method
    6. Optimise the generated code using the TidyProgram method
    7. Combine and locate the subroutines and functions for the selected chip using the MergeSubroutines method
    8. Complete the final optimisation using the FinalOptimise method
    9. Write the assembly using the WriteAssembly method
    10. Assemble and generate the hex file using GCASM, MPASM, PICAS or some other define Assembler
    11. Optionally, pass programming operations to the programmer
    12. Write compilation report using the WriteCompilationReport method
    13. If needed, write the error and warning log using the WriteErrorLog method
    14. Exit, setting the ERRORLEVEL
```

Note \#1: Constants are can be created in many places and the order is
critical when trying to understant the process.

Step 3.iv; Step 3.xi, 3.xiv and xvi. These are Find compiler directives;
Runscripts, process IFDEFs and replace Constants values respectively.  
This means constants that are not created by the Find compiler
directives step are clearly not available in the RunScripts step, and
the same applies to the process IFDEFs step.  So, please consider the
order of constant creation in terms of these steps.  Always think about
the precendence of constant creation.  

Note \#2: When using IFDEFs Conditional statements you should \#UNDEFINE
all constants prior to \#DEFINE.  Whilst the will be cases where the
constant does not exist, or where the Preprocessor can determine the
outcome of the Conditional statements there will be cases, specifically
nested IFDEFs Conditional statements, where you will be required to use
\#UNDEFINE to remove all warnings.

Note \#3: Good practice is NOT to create constants in a library where
the user can overwrite the value of the same constant.  You must
determine if the user has created the constant and then create a default
value if the user has not defined a value.   An example:

``` screen
  IF NODEF(AD_DELAY) THEN
     'Acquisition time. Can be reduced in some circumstances - see PIC manual for details
     AD_DELAY = 2 10US
  END IF
```

This will create the constant AD\_DELAY only when the user program does
not define a value.  

<span class="strong">**FreeBASIC COMPILATION OF GCBASIC SOURCE
CODE**</span>

The compiler is relatively simple in terms of the compilation.  

Use the following versions of the FreeBASIC compiler to compile the
GCBASIC source code.

For Windows 32 bit

``` screen
    FreeBASIC Compiler - Version 1.07.1 (2019-09-27), built for win32 (32bit)
    Copyright (C) 2004-2019 The FreeBASIC development team.
```

For Windows 64 bit

``` screen
    FreeBASIC Compiler - Version 1.07.1 (2019-09-27), built for win64 (64bit)
    Copyright (C) 2004-2019 The FreeBASIC development team.
```

Using other version of Windows FREEBASIC compiler are NOT tested and may
fail.   Use the specific versions shown above.

The compile use the following command lines. Where "%ProgramFiles% is
the root location of the FreeBASIC installation, and $SF is the location
of the source files and the destination of the compiled executable.

For Windows 32 bit

``` screen
    "%ProgramFiles%\FreeBASIC\win32\fbc.exe"  $SF\gcbasic.bas   -exx -arch 586 -x $SF\gcbasic32.exe
```

For Windows 64 bit

``` screen
    "%ProgramFiles%\FreeBASIC\win64\fbc.exe"  $SF\gcbasic.bas   -x $SF\gcbasic64.exe -ex
```

Linux, FreeBSD and Pi OS are also supported.   Please see
<a href="http://gcbasic.sourceforge.net/help/" class="link">Online Help</a>
and search for the specific operating system.  

  
  

<span class="strong">**FreeBASIC COMPILER TOOLCHAIN**</span>

To simplify the establishment of development enviroment download a
complete installation from
<a href="https://sourceforge.net/projects/gcbasic/files/Support%20Files/GCBASICWindowsToolchain/FreeBASIC.zip/download" class="link">here</a>.  
This includes the correct version of FreeBASIC and the libraries - all
ready for use.   Simply unzip the ZIP to a folder and the toolchain is
ready for use.   For an IDE please see the information above.  

  
  

<span class="strong">**BUILDING THE GCBASIC EXECUTABLE USING THE FBEDIT
IDE**</span>

To build GCBASIC from the source files.   The list shows the
installation of the FBEdit IDE.

Complete the following:

``` screen
        1. Download and install FreeBASIC from  url shown above.
        2. Download and install fbedit from https://sourceforge.net/projects/fbedit/?source=dlp
        3. Download the GCBASIC source using SVN into a gcbasic source folder.
        4. Run fbedit (installed at step #2).  Load project  GCBASIC.fbp  from GBASIC source folder.
        5. Hit <f5> to compile.
```

  
  

<span class="strong">**CODING STYLES**</span>

Remember, Hugh was 12 when he started this project.   You must forgive
him for being a genius, but, he did not implement many programming
styles and conventions that are common place today.  

There is a general lack of documentation.   We are adding documentation
as we progress.   This can make the source frustrating initially but can
find the code segments as they are clearly within method blocks.  

The following rules are recommended.

``` screen
    1. All CONSTANTS are capitalized
    2. Do not use TAB - use two spaces
    3. You can rename a variable to a meaningful name.  Hugh used a lot of single character variables many years ago.  This should be avoided in new code.
    4. Document as you progress.
    5. Ask for help.
```

  

<span class="strong">**COMPILER SOURCE INSIGHTS**</span>

<span class="emphasis">*There are many very useful methods*</span>, a
lot of methods, look at existing code before adding any new method.  
The compiler is mature from a functionality standpoint.   Just immature
in terms of documentation.  

<span class="strong">**COMPILER DEBUGGING**</span>

<span class="emphasis">*To debug or isolate a specific issue*</span> use
lots of messages using PRINT or HSERPRINT  Both of these methods are
easy to setup and use.

<span class="emphasis">*Specific to \#SCRIPT*</span> you can use WARNING
messages to display results of calculations or assignments.

<span class="emphasis">*Specific to CONDITIONAL Compilation*</span> use
`conditionaldebugfile` (se above) to display conditional statement debug
for the specified file.    Options are any valid source file or nothing.
   Nested conditions are evaluated sequentially, therefor the first,
second, third etc etc.    The compiler does not at this point
rationalised the hierarchy of nested conditions.   It simply finds a
condition and then matches to an \#ENDIF.   So, the compiler walks
through the nested conditions as the outer nested, then the next nest,
the next nest etc. etc.   This compiler is completing the following
actions:  

<div class="orderedlist">

1.  If the conditional is not valid.   Remove the code segment include
    the \#IF and the \#ENDIF
2.  If the conditional is valid.   Remove the just the \#IF and the
    \#ENDIF

</div>

So, is this context the compiler walks the code many time (as these are
lists not arrrays this is blindly fast) removing code segments.  

The following program shows the impact of nested conditions..  Each nest
is evaluated until all conditions have been assessed..  See the comment
section of the listing to see the output from the debugging.

``` screen
        #CHIP 18F16Q41
        #OPTION EXPLICIT

        ; -----  Add the following line to USE.ini ------------------
        ;
        ;        conditionaldebugfile = IFDEF_TEST.gcb
        ;
        ; -----------------------------------------------------------

        #IFDEF PIC
            #IFDEF ONEOF(CHIP_18F15Q41, CHIP_18F16Q41)
                #IF CHIPRAM = 2048  'TRUE
                    #IF CHIPWORDS = 32768 ' TRUE
                        #IFDEF VAR(NVMLOCK) 'TRUE
                            #IFDEF VAR(OSCCON2)  'TRUE
                                #IFDEF  VAR(NVMCON0)  'TRUE    set var1 to 1
                                    DIM _VAR1
                                    _VAR1 = 1
                                #ENDIF
                            #ENDIF
                        #ENDIF
                    #ENDIF
                #ENDIF

                #IF CHIPRAM = 4096  'TRUE
                    #IF CHIPWORDS = 32768 ' TRUE
                        #IFDEF VAR(NVMLOCK) 'TRUE
                            #IFDEF VAR(OSCCON2)  'TRUE
                                #IFDEF  VAR(NVMCON0)  'TRUE   = set var1 to 0
                                    DIM _VAR1
                                    _VAR1 = 0
                                #ENDIF
                            #ENDIF
                        #ENDIF
                    #ENDIF
                #ENDIF
            #ENDIF
        #ENDIF

        Do
        Loop

        // ===============================================
        // ***  Below is debugger output for this file ***
        // ===============================================

        // GCBASIC (0.99.02 2022-07-21 (Windows 32 bit) : Build 1143)

        // Compiling c:\Users\admin\Downloads\IFDEF_TEST.gcb

        //               13: #IFDEF PIC
        //               15: #IFDEF ONEOF(CHIP_18F15Q41, CHIP_18F16Q41)
        //               17: #IF CHIPRAM = 2048
        //               19: #IF CHIPWORDS = 32768
        //               21: #IFDEF VAR(NVMLOCK)
        //               23: #IFDEF VAR(OSCCON2)
        //               25: #IFDEF VAR(NVMCON0)
        //               ;DIM _VAR1
        //               27: DIM _VAR1
        //               ;_VAR1 = 1
        //               28: _VAR1 = 1

        //               15: #IFDEF ONEOF(CHIP_18F15Q41, CHIP_18F16Q41)
        //               17: #IF CHIPRAM = 2048
        //               19: #IF CHIPWORDS = 32768
        //               21: #IFDEF VAR(NVMLOCK)
        //               23: #IFDEF VAR(OSCCON2)
        //               25: #IFDEF VAR(NVMCON0)
        //               ;DIM _VAR1
        //               27: DIM _VAR1
        //               ;_VAR1 = 1
        //               28: _VAR1 = 1

        //               39: #IF CHIPRAM = 4096
        //               41: #IF CHIPWORDS = 32768
        //               43: #IFDEF VAR(NVMLOCK)
        //               45: #IFDEF VAR(OSCCON2)
        //               47: #IFDEF VAR(NVMCON0)
        //               ;DIM _VAR1
        //               49: DIM _VAR1
        //               ;_VAR1 = 0
        //               50: _VAR1 = 0

        //               41: #IF CHIPWORDS = 32768
        //               43: #IFDEF VAR(NVMLOCK)
        //               45: #IFDEF VAR(OSCCON2)
        //               47: #IFDEF VAR(NVMCON0)
        //               ;DIM _VAR1
        //               49: DIM _VAR1
        //               ;_VAR1 = 0
        //               50: _VAR1 = 0

        //               43: #IFDEF VAR(NVMLOCK)
        //               45: #IFDEF VAR(OSCCON2)
        //               47: #IFDEF VAR(NVMCON0)
        //               ;DIM _VAR1
        //               49: DIM _VAR1
        //               ;_VAR1 = 0
        //               50: _VAR1 = 0

        //               45: #IFDEF VAR(OSCCON2)
        //               47: #IFDEF VAR(NVMCON0)
        //               ;DIM _VAR1
        //               49: DIM _VAR1
        //               ;_VAR1 = 0
        //               50: _VAR1 = 0

        //               47: #IFDEF VAR(NVMCON0)
        //               ;DIM _VAR1
        //               49: DIM _VAR1
        //               ;_VAR1 = 0
        //               50: _VAR1 = 0

        // Program compiled successfully (Compile time: 1 seconds)

        // Assembling program using GCASM
        // Program assembled successfully (Assembly time: 0.125 seconds)
        // Done
```

  
  

The resulting ASM from the about code is as expected.  The assignment of
`VAR1 = 0`.  

``` screen
        ;DIM _VAR1
        ;_VAR1 = 0
            clrf    _VAR1,ACCESS
        ;Do
        SysDoLoop_S1
        ;Loop
            bra SysDoLoop_S1
        SysDoLoop_E1
```

  

</div>
